Teritory Mapping of the Louisiana Waterthrush at three Tennesee locations

Kirsten English

Goals of the Study
  The goal of this study is to look at territory size of the Louisiana Waterthrush during breeding season at three locations; Wall Branch stream located in Rotary Park in Clarksville Tennessee 37040, Dry Creek located in Cheatham Wildlife Management Area in Ashland City Tennessee 37015, Big Hollow located in Beaman Park in Ashland City Tennessee 37015. Mapping these territories in these streams will show not only the territories of the Louisiana Waterthrush present but also possible areas of concentrated use that may aid in the location of their nesting sites. 

Field methods
  We first mapped out our study area of the streams (a few weeks before the arrival of the first birds) with a handheld global positioning system (GPS) so we had a reliable map of our study sites when out in the field, the streams chosen for this project were not well mapped before and Google Maps did not provide a detailed enough map that would be useful. To map the stream, we used a handheld GPS unit the Garmin Etrex-30 model to mark waypoints every 3-5 meters apart. While this was done, the way point number was written down as well stream information pertaining to that way-point location. Stream information included; stream width, stream type (confluence or tributary), and noted if any water was present. The notation of water is important because of the feeding habits of the Louisiana Waterthrush, having this information about suitable habitats will be helpful later when searching out individuals. Maps were then made using ArcMap. 
	Sampling for territory mapping occurred within the first week of the Louisiana Waterthrush being spot at the stream locations, streams were checked in rotation every three days until a Waterthrush was spotted. Sampling period was from March 21, 2019 until May 10, 2019. This period of time worked well because we were able to get location points before birds had paired up as well as when the nests were established, and the first clutches of the season were laid. Location points had to be collected in a way that wouldn’t affect the focal individual, but also allowed time for the observer to observe all birds in a location. Observations were made primarily in the morning, since this is when the birds sing most often, although there were a few afternoon observations due to scheduling interferences. It was important that the observer recording location points did not scare the bird during this process. The Louisiana Waterthrush spends a large majority of its time foraging in the stream, so location points where taken via direct observation. The points were taken once the Louisiana Waterthrush had left the area and was a safe distance away that taking the point would not scare the bird away. This meant that the observer needed to make a mental note of any points needed to be taken until the bird was more than 15m away. Location points were taken where the bird was first encounter, then every 5 minutes within a 20-minute period, points were also taken where the bird sang, when the bird moved at least five meters as well as where the bird turned around in the stream (possibly marking the end of a territory). This usually meant following the bird while they foraged on the stream. The 20-minute period was chosen to make sure that there was still enough time to observe other birds in the section of the stream because of time constraints during the weekdays. Even though there way a 20-minute observational period, not all focal individuals were observed for the full 20 minutes; in that case the individual was considered “lost” (see protocol below). Occasionally extra location points were taken on individuals that were observed for longer outside the 20-minutes period, if time allowed it. 

Data Analysis
	KDE for each stream location was made using R (see attached script). KDE was placed over map provided by Google Maps. KDE was made for each location and not for individuals because not all individuals were banded. 



Repository link: https://kirstenglish.github.io/Final-Project/